---
{
  "title": "200.7: Sign verified messages",
  "slt": ["200.7"],
  "type": "Lesson",
  "description": "Learn how to cryptographically prove the ownership of a wallet by signing a piece of data using data sign.",
  "videoURL": "",
  "lastEdited": "2024-04-03",
  "author": "Jingles",
}
---

## Introduction

In this lesson, you will learn how to cryptographically prove the ownership of a wallet by signing a piece of data using data sign, 

This is useful for verifying the ownership of a wallet or proof user's consent to a specific action.

Since a user's public address can be used as their identifier, we can build an authentication mechanism that is based on message signing. This mechanism is made possible because we are able to cryptographically prove the ownership of an account by signing a specific piece of data using the corresponding private key. If the data is correctly signed, then the backend will recognize it as coming from the owner of the public address.

To check if a user owns a certain address, one needs to provide a message and have the user "sign" it. This "signature" is generated using the message, the user's private key, the public key, and a cryptographic algorithm.

To ensure the signature is valid, the same cryptographic algorithm is applied to the message and the public key is obtained. You may be wondering how this can be secure? The answer is that without the private key, the validation of the message and the public key cannot be cryptographically matched, thereby confirming ownership.

## Step 1: Get user's public address

On Cardano, to obtain a user's public address as an identifier, we can use their wallet's staking address.

With the user's wallet connected, the first step is to get the user's staking address and send it to our server.

```javascript
const { wallet, connected } = useWallet();

async function frontendStep1() {
  if (connected) {
    const userAddress = (await wallet.getRewardAddresses())[0];
     // do: send request with 'userAddress' to the backend
  }
}
```

# Step 2: Generate a nonce

Next, we first need to generate a new nonce, which is initialized as a random string. The purpose of this is to create a unique message that can be used for authentication of the user's wallet. 

This nonce will be the payload for the user to prove ownership of the wallet. With Mesh, you can generate a new nonce with `generateNonce()`, and set the message as `Sign to login in to Mesh: {nonce}`.

```javascript
import { generateNonce } from '@meshsdk/core';

async function backendStep1(userAddress) {
  // do: if new user, create new user model in the database

  const nonce = generateNonce('Sign to login in to Mesh: ');

  // do: store 'nonce' in user model in the database

  // do: return 'nonce'
}
```

# Step 3: Sign the nonce

We are ready to use the private key associated with the wallet to sign the nonce with `await wallet.signData(userAddress, nonce)`, which enables the dApp to request the user to sign a payload according to [CIP-8](https://cips.cardano.org/cips/cip8/).

With the nonce generated, we show them the message that is to be signed: `Sign to login in to Mesh: {nonce}`. Once accepted, the signature will be generated and the dApp will process the signature to authenticate the user.

```javascript
async function frontendStep2(nonce) {
  try {
    const userAddress = (await wallet.getRewardAddresses())[0];
    const signature = await wallet.signData(userAddress, nonce);

    // do: send request with 'signature' and 'userAddress' to the backend
  } catch (error) {
    // catch error if user refuse to sign
  }
}
```

# Step 4: Verify the signature

When the backend receives the request, it retrieves the user associated with the specified address from the database. It then obtains the associated nonce from the database, which is a random value that is only known to the user.

With the nonce, staking address, and signature, the backend can cryptographically check that the nonce has been correctly signed by the user. This allows the backend to verify that the user is the owner of the public address, as only the owner of the address would know the nonce value and be able to sign it with the associated private key.

If the signature is verified, the user has successfully authenticated their wallet or decisions.

We also ensure that the nonce is not re-used (as this would make it possible for an attacker to gain access to the user's account). This is done by generating a random nonce for the user and saving it to the database. By constantly generating a unique nonce each time the user logs in, we can guarantee the user's signature is secure and keep their account safe.
  
```javascript
import { checkSignature } from '@meshsdk/core';

async function backendStep2(userAddress, signature) {
  // do: get 'nonce' from user (database) using 'userAddress'

  const result = checkSignature(nonce, userAddress, signature);

  // do: update 'nonce' in the database with another random string

  // do: do whatever you need to do, once the user has proven ownership
  // it could be creating a valid JSON Web Token (JWT) or session
  // it could be doing something offchain
  // it could just be updating something in the database
}
```

## Conclusion

In this lesson, you have learned how to cryptographically prove the ownership of a wallet by signing a piece of data using data sign. This is useful for verifying the ownership of a wallet or proof user's consent to a specific action.