---
{
  "title": "101.2: Start a Project with Mesh",
  "slt": ["101.2"],
  "type": "Lesson",
  "description": "Start a Project With Mesh",
  "videoURL": "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jKP391zpy6Q",
  "lastEdited": "2024-01-26",
  "author": "James & Jingles"
}
---

In this section, you will learn how to start a project integrated with MeshJS using two methods. The first method will be to setup the project from scratch manually starting from installing NextJS and configuring the Mesh Provider. Then in the second method you will set up the project using Starter Templates.

## Method #1: Starting a Project Manually

### Step 1: Next.js Installation Along With Typescript

Open your terminal then copy and paste the following commands:

```bash
npx create-next-app@latest --typescript
```

After that in your terminal there are questions appear, follow the answers as shown here:

```bash
Need to install the following packages:

create-next-app@13.5.6

Ok to proceed? y
√ What is your project named? ... mesh-app-1
√ Would you like to use ESLint? ... Yes
√ Would you like to use Tailwind CSS? ... Yes
√ Would you like to use `src/` directory? ... No
√ Would you like to use App Router? (recommended) ... No
√ Would you like to customize the default import alias (@/\*)? ... No
```

### Step 2: Install MeshJS Package

```bash
cd mesh-app-1
npm install @meshsdk/core @meshsdk/react
```

### Step 3: Add Webpack In `next.config.js` File

Open the next.config.js file, delete all the code in the file then replace it with the following code:

```typescript
/** @type {import('next').NextConfig} */
const nextConfig = {
  reactStrictMode: true,
  webpack: function (config, options) {
    config.experiments = {
      asyncWebAssembly: true,
      layers: true,
    };
    return config;
  },
};
module.exports = nextConfig;
```

### Step 4: Add `MeshProvider`

The `Provider` is a component that uses React context features. In React, a 'context' allows you to share data or state across applications without needing to pass props directly from component to component. 

The `MeshProvider` provides context that contains the configuration, state, or data needed by the web applications you build. One of the most concrete examples is when a user connects their wallet on the main page.  If the user then visits another page, the Mesh Provider plays a role in ensuring tha application "knows" that the wallet is still connected.  You can read more about the React Provider pattern [here](https://mortenbarklund.com/blog/react-architecture-provider-pattern/).

_important note: when we say 'Provider' we are referring only to a React component called `MeshProvider`. This should not be confused with the blockchain service "providers" that Mesh implements that allow us to query or interact with the blockchain via third-party services (e.g. Blockfrost, Koios). We shall introduce these in a future lesson._

Open the `pages/_app.tsx` file, delete all the code in the file then replace it with the following code:

```typescript
import type { AppProps } from "next/app";
import { MeshProvider } from "@meshsdk/react";

function MyApp({ Component, pageProps }: AppProps) {
  return (
    <MeshProvider>
      <Component {...pageProps} />
    </MeshProvider>
  );
}

export default MyApp;
```

### Step 5: Import `@meshsdk/react` Library In Main Page

Open the `pages/index.tsx` file, delete all the code in the file then replace it with the following simple code example:

```typescript
import { CardanoWallet } from "@meshsdk/react";

export default function Home() {
  return <CardanoWallet />;
}
```

The `page/index.tsx` file is the main page of your web application. You can modify the simple code example above according to the project idea you are going to build.

### Step 6: Run The Application On The Development Server

```bash
npm run dev
```

After that, open a browser, direct the URL to `http://localhost:3000`. You will see the `CardanoWallet` component coming from the meshsdk/react library

## Method #2: Starting a Project Using Starter Templates

MeshJS provides multiple templates at [MeshJS website](https://meshjs.dev/starter-templates), and we will proceed with the `Starter` template.

Prepare a new directory to start this second example. We would Open your terminal then copy and paste the following command:

### Step 1: Install Next.JS Integrated Mesh.JS Using Starter Templates
Prepare a new directory to start this second example. Open your terminal then copy and paste the following command:

```bash
npx create-mesh-app mesh-app-2 -t starter -s next -l ts
cd mesh-app-2
```

You will see the next.config.js file, the `pages/_app.tsx` file, and the MeshJS packages in the package.json file, have been configured automatically

### Step 2: Run The Application On The Development Server

```bash
npm run dev
```

Open a browser and go to `http://localhost:3000`. You will see that the main-page `pages/index.tsx` is an example of a ready-made web application and there is a `<CardanoWallet />` component that comes from the `meshsdk/react` library. You can make modifications according to your project ideas.

A few notes regarding second method using starter templates, in first method you setup NextJS from the beginning. If you setup NextJS version 13 and above there is an option to use TailwindCSS, so in first method you can setup NextJS integrated MeshJS along with TailwindCSS but in second method using starter templates, TailwindCSS is not installed. To install TailwindCSS on NextJS you can use the following documentation reference at [official documentation](https://tailwindcss.com/docs/guides/nextjs).

## Step-by-step indepth tutorial

In this section, you will learn how to create a Navbar that contains CardanoWallet components. When moving between pages, the Navbar you created will remain in its position.  Most importantly you will see evidence of the implementation of the MeshProvider which plays a role in ensuring the wallet is still connected. So when you move between pages you will see that the connection status (connected / disconnected) of your wallet will not change.

### Step-1: Install Next.JS Integrated Mesh.JS Using Starter Templates

```bash
npx create-mesh-app navbar-cardanowallet -t starter -s next -l ts
```

In this example, we will name the project `navbar-cardanowallet`. We shall also install [Tailwind](https://tailwindcss.com/), a popular and powerful CSS design framework.

### Step-2: TailwindCSS Installation

```bash
cd navbar-cardanowallet
npm install -D tailwindcss postcss autoprefixer
npx tailwindcss init -p
```

After the installation process is complete, we need to do some configuration for Tailwind. Locate the `tailwind.config.js` and `postcss.config.js` files. Open the `tailwind.config.js` file then delete all the code in the file and replace it with the following code:

```javascript
/** @type {import('tailwindcss').Config} */
module.exports = {
  content: [
    "./app/**/*.{js,ts,jsx,tsx,mdx}",
    "./pages/**/*.{js,ts,jsx,tsx,mdx}",
    "./components/**/*.{js,ts,jsx,tsx,mdx}",

    // Or if using `src` directory:
    "./src/**/*.{js,ts,jsx,tsx,mdx}",
  ],
  theme: {
    extend: {},
  },
  plugins: [],
};
```

After that, open the `styles/globals.css` file, delete all the code in the file then replace it with the following code:

```css
@tailwind base;
@tailwind components;
@tailwind utilities;
```

### Step-3: Create Navbar and Layout Components

Create a folder called `components` in the pages directory

```bash
mkdir pages/components
```

Create a file called `Navbar.tsx` in the `components` folder

```bash
touch pages/components/Navbar.tsx
```

Open the `pages/components/Navbar.tsx` file then copy-paste the following code:

```typescript
import Link from "next/link";
import { CardanoWallet } from "@meshsdk/react";

export default function Navbar() {
  return (
    <div className="flex bg-black text-white p-5 justify-between">
      <div className="flex">
        <Link href="/" className="mr-5 hover:font-bold text-xl">
          Home
        </Link>
        <Link href="/users" className="hover:font-bold text-xl">
          Users
        </Link>
      </div>
      <CardanoWallet />
    </div>
  );
}
```

Create a file called Layout.tsx in the components folder

```bash
touch pages/components/Layout.tsx
```

Open the `pages/components/Layout.tsx` file then copy-paste the following code:

```typescript
import Navbar from "./Navbar";

export default function Layout({ children }: any) {
  return (
    <>
      <Navbar />
      <main>{children}</main>
    </>
  );
}
```

### Step-4: Add Layout And MeshProvider Component

Open the `pages/\_app.tsx` file, delete all the code in the file then replace it with the following code:

```typescript
import "../styles/globals.css";
import type { AppProps } from "next/app";
import { MeshProvider } from "@meshsdk/react";
import Layout from "./components/Layout";

export default function App({ Component, pageProps }: AppProps) {
  return (
    <MeshProvider>
      <Layout>
        <Component {...pageProps} />
      </Layout>
    </MeshProvider>
  );
}
```

Step-4 is quite a crucial step because here you are implementing the `MeshProvider` and `Layout` components that you created. Both components use the React context feature.

### Step-5: Create The Main-Page And Users-Page

Open the `pages/index.tsx file`, delete all the code in the file then replace it with the following code:

```typescript
import { useWallet } from "@meshsdk/react";

export default function Home() {
  const { connected } = useWallet();

  return (
    <div className="p-3">
      <h1 className="text-2xl font-bold">Home Page</h1>
      {!connected ? (
        <p>
          The wallet is{" "}
          <span className="text-red-500 font-bold">disconnected</span> at
          home-page
        </p>
      ) : (
        <p>
          The wallet is{" "}
          <span className="text-green-500 font-bold">connected</span> at
          home-page
        </p>
      )}
    </div>
  );
}
```

Create a folder called `users` in the pages directory

```bash
mkdir pages/users
```

Create a file called `index.tsx` in the users folder:

```bash
touch pages/users/index.tsx
```

Open the `pages/users/index.tsx` file then copy-paste the following code:

```typescript
import { useWallet } from "@meshsdk/react";

export default function UserPage() {
  const { connected } = useWallet();

  return (
    <div className="p-3">
      <h1 className="text-2xl font-bold">User Page</h1>
      {!connected ? (
        <p>
          The wallet is{" "}
          <span className="text-red-500 font-bold">disconnected</span> at
          user-page
        </p>
      ) : (
        <p>
          The wallet is{" "}
          <span className="text-green-500 font-bold">connected</span> at
          user-page
        </p>
      )}
    </div>
  );
}
```

Notice that the code for the main-page and the users-page has the same pattern and logic.  In the tsx code there is a conditional rendering pattern using the ternary operator with the following conditions:

 * if connected is `false` then the page will display text containing the word "disconnected" in red color
 *  if the value of connected is `true`, the page will display text containing the word "connected" in green color
 
This code also contains `useWallet`, which is a Wallet hook. `useWallet` has various parameters and methods, one of which is used here.  It returns the value `true` which means the wallet is connected. In the next modules 102.2-102.6, you will learn more about the Wallet hooks.

### Step-6: Run the application on the development server

```bash
npm run dev
```

Now open a browser, go to the URL http://localhost:3000. You will see the main-page or Home-Page which has a Navbar, and in the right corner of the Navbar there is the rendered `CardanoWallet` component. Connect your wallet, and then you should see the words "The wallet has been disconnected at home-page" change to "The wallet has been connected at home-page". 

Next try to switch pages to the User-Page by clicking Users on the Navbar (or directing changing the url to http://localhost:3000/users ).The word "connected", which is colored green, should not change, which means the wallet remains connected even if you change pages. You should also see that the CardanoWallet component in the right corner of the Navbar has not changed and still shows the nominal balance.

You can modify the code examples in this module according to your project ideas. Feel free to make modifications and create something different while applying the same principles from code example above to practice your skills as a developer.
